Consider Your Ears by Robert Krulwich

(Adapted and revised from an earlier version for Adjacent Magazine, NYU) 

Picture yourself before you were born, floating inside a womb, not making noises because you can’t, not yet, not seeing, not tasting, not touching. So what are you doing inside your mama all that time, mentally? Are you a blank?

No, for one thing, you are listening. Our ears turn on early, before the other senses. Floating in the fetal darkness for weeks, for months, we are open to our mother’s heartbeat, the shlishslosh of fluids, conversation,  music -- to a hint of what's out there beyond us. Hearing is one of the first things we do. Even before breathing. 

Which is why I like to think, all these years later,  when someone tells me a story, falling into a listening state is so natural for me, so primal, I’ve been doing it for so long, I’m just ready. Put the right voice in my ear, give me a good tale, and I don’t just fall in, I’m ALL in.  

And why is listening to a voice so compelling? Maybe because when I’m listening, that’s not all I’m doing. I’m painting as well.  If you begin a story saying “Let’s go to a small clearing in the woods where we will find a little, chubby rabbit nuzzling some fresh green grass” --- as you say this,  automatically I find myself conjuring a rabbit and it won’t be your rabbit because its face, its fur, its eyes, its colors, even how it munches -- the details are all mine.  This rabbit is a hybrid, shaped by you, colored in by me. 

Now suppose I’m the one telling the story on the radio and there are 250,000 people listening and therefore all rabbitizing, mentally creating slightly different rabbits chewing grass in 250,000 slightly (or very) different woods.  None of these rabbits can see each other since each of them is living in a different head, forever separate except linked back to me, because I’m the guy who started it. For a long time I didn’t think about who was listening or what was going on, but now I think there’s something almost sexy about this.  Without me none of those rabbits would be there. Yet I can’t create them alone. It takes two, my voice as the progenitor, each listener’s head as an egg and what we did was an intimate, creative act without a lot of heavy breathing....It just happened. Seamlessly. A mating act that ends with an explosion of rabbits.   

And doing it this way -- not filming stories or drawing them or reading them,  but telling stories out loud -- feels not just generative, but has a nice emotional power.  You are listening to my verbs, my nouns, the rises and falls of my voice and what you hear loosens images and colors that come from deep in your brain and when we join, there’s a chance, a slightly better than-at-the-movies chance, that you can walk away with an image that belongs to you and stays in your head. That’s the goal, anyway.        

TV is different. Movies are different. There, the makers of the tale dictate what you see. When Disney puts a rabbit in the woods, it’s not your rabbit, it’s theirs and yes, it can be a lovely rabbit, but it won’t have your imagination in it.  And that, I think, is why radio works its own magic -- because eyes aren’t involved. You’re not staring at, you’re dreaming of; the movies insist on a particular and what they show you is designed to make you feel a certain way. Either you submit or you don’t. But there’s no sharing the creative act.    

Which is not to say that listening to a storyteller is always the best way to go. There are times, there are stories, when movies can do it better.   Movies show you faces; radio can’t. Faces, as we’ve learned since we opened our eyes (six or so months after we opened our ears) teach us whom to trust, whom to love, whom to fear.  We have been reading faces for so long, we’ve gotten very good at it and if we see Katherine Hepburn or Meryl Streep, 9 feet tall on a shiny screen in the dark of a theater, they can make us feel things that our ears can’t. Great actors have that advantage. They’re an eyeful.  An earful of Meryl Streep, on the other hand, just her voice, not her face, that’s umm….(with all due deference) less of a thing.      

Each kingdom has its advantages. Each kingdom has its stars.  

Books. Gotta bow to books. What’s on a page also has a ‘voice’ and when I’m reading anything—a poem, a story, even a news item, pictures tumble automatically into my head. If you and I read the same book, we will see different pictures. As with rabbits, there are tens of millions of Huck Finns and Harry Potters living in as many brains. 

But a human voice in your ear can be more -- what’s the word here? Authorial. You don’t hear Mark Twain or J.K. Rowling the way you hear your grandpa when he’s telling you a tale. Grandpa’s voice colors every sentence. He’s talking, yes, and it’s the talk you hear, his intonations, his breaths, his cadence.  With Twain and Rowling, they’re speaking too, but who’s talking is lurking in word choices, syntax, meter. You feel them differently.  

On the radio or in a podcast, the narrator is a “me”, a particular person, an Ira Glass, or a great audio-reader like Jim Dale reading Harry Potter. Whether the storyteller does one voice or many, what we hear is a distinct, particular somebody. 

That’s what we hear. What we see when we think of the storyteller can often be a blur. I’ve had the experience of walking onto a stage before an audience that has been listening to me for years and when they look up and see the real, physical me, there’s a puzzled silence. It lasts for five, maybe ten seconds, but I know exactly what’s happening. Over the years they’ve formed a loose impression, more like a silhouette or a smudged up version of me and when they see the real guy for the first time, I’m always slightly, differently, uncomfortably -- wrong, either a little taller or shorter or balder or hairier or older or younger than what they’d expected. When we had a stage show, Jad (my Radiolab partner) and I would walk on, stand together for a beat, Jad would look at the audience, sigh and say, “Sorry. We’ll give you a minute.” 

And looking down at the first few rows, I’d see people startle, then turn away or quickly close their eyes.  They wanted their own versions of us back. 

On the other hand, once the audience settles in and starts to listen, what they are seeing in their heads can  have an almost technicolor precision, a sharpness that can match any movie. This is where music and sound effects show their power; a nicely produced podcast gives the listener an extra box of crayons to color with, and it doesn’t matter how fantastical or implausible the plot, the scenes will stay real if the listener is doing the coloring. I remember an ad created in the 1960’s by comedy writer Stan Freberg  who was hired by commercial radio stations to tout radio’s selling power. He did it with one example:

I am, he told his listeners, about to roll a 700 foot mountain of whipped cream into Lake Michigan, already drained and filled with hot chocolate after which  a squadron of Royal Canadian Air Force jets will zoom across the sky towing a ten ton maraschino cherry, which they will drop onto the crest of the cream while 25,000 specially hired extras roar with delight…

….all of which he then did, with sound effects,  cueing the cream, the jets, the cherry – producing a 20 second Hollywood movie that felt charmingly real. If you don’t believe me, listen for yourself, HERE: https://youtu.be/ppZ57EeX6vE 

Now try that in a movie theater. Oh, for a few gazillion dollars you could maybe pull off a literal, plausible facsimile, but it could never be as privately convincing as the Lake Michigan whipped cream I painted in my head because I painted it. That’s the key. When a creative act is shared, when the artist and audience are in cahoots, the experience gains personal power. 

In the end -- and this is where audio stands tallest -- what you do at the movies, at the theater -- is you gaze. The artists create something to see and if they do it well, wonderful things can happen. But when the story comes through your ears, well, that’s a different portal and sometimes listening can be so simple, so easy, so freeing, it can feel even better -- like a perfect embrace.   

All you have to do is close those gazing eyes, step inside yourself and you are totally free to imagine -- and if I do my job right and you close your eyes tight, you and I, dancing our very private dance, can do -- anything, anything together.

Fonte: https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/radiolab/consider-your-ears
